---
title: IoT Concepts
parent: IoT Edge 101
grand_parent: Home
nav_order: 1
---

# IoT Concepts

Before going into details with Azure IoT Edge, Let’s do a quick review
of some [IoT
Concepts](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/iot-hub/iot-concepts-and-iot-hub).

IoT applications or solutions can be described as Things (or devices),
sending data or events that are used to generate Insights. These
insights are used to generate Actions to help improve a business or
process. An example is an engine (a thing), sending pressure and
temperature data that is used to evaluate whether the engine is
performing as expected (an insight), which is used to proactively
prioritize the maintenance schedule for the engine (an action).

To implement an IoT solution the Azure IoT platform provides you with
multiple services and different capabilities. We will have *IoT devices*
(also known as *downstream devices*), which will have their own
*identity*. The device identity is generated by registering the device
into *Azure IoT Hub*. You can register devices into IoT Hub manually, or
at scale by using the *Device Provisioning Service*. Devices use their
identity to authenticate and communicate with IoT hub. Devices (usually)
send *telemetry*, have *properties* which describe their state, and
respond to *commands* which correspond to their capabilities. The
devices have their properties stored in a device twin in the device
registry. Let’s have a detailed review of the previous IoT concepts:

- **Azure IoT Hub:** Azure IoT Hub is a managed service hosted in the
  cloud that acts as a central message hub for communication between an
  IoT application and its attached devices. You can connect millions of
  devices and their backend solutions reliably and securely. Almost any
  device can be connected to an IoT hub.

- **Device Provisioning Service (DPS):** The IoT Hub Device Provisioning
  Service (DPS) is a helper service for IoT Hub that enables zero-touch,
  just-in-time provisioning to the right IoT hub without requiring human
  intervention. DPS enables the provisioning of millions of devices in a
  secure and scalable manner.

- **IoT Device:** Virtual or physical IoT devices (things) differ from
  other clients such as browsers and mobile apps, specifically, they are
  often embedded systems with reduced or no human operator, can be
  deployed in remote -often inaccessible- locations, might only be
  reachable through the solution back-end, might have limited power and
  processing resources, usually have attached some sensors, might have
  intermittent, slow, or expensive network connectivity and might need
  to use proprietary, custom or industry-specific application protocols.

- **IoT Edge Device**: And edge device is a special type of device that
  usually provides dedicated edge computing capabilities such as data
  pre-processing and analysis, offline capabilities, bandwidth
  consumption optimization, etc. Azure IoT Edge provides a
  device-focused runtime that enables you to deploy, run, and monitor
  containerized Linux workloads. IoT Edge devices are also downstream
  devices from the point of view of IoT Hub.

- **Downstream device:** A downstream device can be any application or
  platform that has an identity created with the Azure IoT Hub cloud
  service. In many cases, these applications use the Azure IoT device
  SDK. A downstream device could even be an application running on the
  IoT Edge gateway device itself. In the context of the IoT Edge and
  transparent gateways, the downstream devices that connects to IoT Hub
  thru IoT Edge are sometimes called leaf devices or child devices.

- **Device Identity Registry and Authentication:** Every IoT Hub has an
  identity registry that stores information about the devices and
  modules permitted to connect to it. Before a device or module can
  connect, there must be an entry for that device or module in the IoT
  hub's identity registry. A device or module authenticates with the IoT
  hub based on credentials stored in the identity registry.

  The IoT Hub supports two methods of authentication between the device
and the IoT Hub: SAS token-based authentication or X.509 certificate
authentication.

- **Device Communication:** IoT Hub uses Transport Layer Security (TLS)
  to secure connections from IoT devices and services. Three versions of
  the TLS protocol are currently supported, namely versions 1.0, 1.1,
  and 1.2. TLS 1.0 and 1.1 are considered legacy and are planned for
  [deprecation](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/iot-hub/iot-hub-tls-deprecating-1-0-and-1-1).

  Typically, IoT devices send telemetry from the sensors to back-end
services in the cloud. However, other types of communication are
possible, such as a back-end service sending commands to your devices.

- **Device Telemetry:** Examples of telemetry received from a device can
  include sensor data such as speed or temperature, an error message
  such as missed event, or an information message to indicate the device
  is in good health. IoT devices send events to an application to gain
  insights. Applications may require specific subsets of events for
  processing or storage at different endpoints.

- **Device Properties:** Properties can be read or set from the IoT hub
  and can be used to send notifications when an action has been
  completed. An example of a specific property on a device is
  temperature. Temperature can be a writable property that can be
  updated on the device or read from a temperature sensor attached to
  the device.

- **Device Commands:** An example of a command is rebooting a device.
  IoT Hub implements commands by allowing you to invoke direct methods
  on devices. Direct methods represent a request-reply interaction with
  a device similar to an HTTP call in that they succeed or fail
  immediately (after a user-specified timeout). This approach is useful
  for scenarios where the course of immediate action is different
  depending on whether the device was able to respond.

- **Device Twins:** *Device twins* are JSON documents that store device
  state information including metadata, configurations, and conditions.
  Azure IoT Hub maintains a device twin for each device that you connect
  to IoT Hub, no matter if it is an edge device or a regular one.

- **Desired Properties and Reported Properties:** Are used to
  synchronize device configuration or conditions, the **solution backend
  can set the desired properties** and the device software can read them
  or receive notifications of its changes; once the device software
  synchronizes its state with the desired properties, the **device set
  the reported properties** accordingly, so the solution backend can
  read them or received the notifications.

  For further information, see [Understand Azure IoT Hub device twins \|
Microsoft
Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/iot-hub/iot-hub-devguide-device-twins)

- **Module Twins:** In IoT Hub, under each device identity, you can
  create up to 50 module identities. Each module identity implicitly
  generates a module twin. Like device twins, module twins are JSON
  documents that store module state information including metadata,
  configurations, and conditions. Azure IoT Hub maintains a module twin
  for each module that you connect to IoT Hub, no matter if it is an
  edge device or a regular one.

  For further information, see [Understand Azure IoT Hub module twins \|
Microsoft
Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/iot-hub/iot-hub-devguide-module-twins)

- **D2C and C2D:** These acronyms are widely used in IoT Solutions
  context. D2C refers to the communications originated at the devices
  which flows to the cloud (usually device telemetry or device reported
  properties), while C2D follows the contrary path, that is,
  communications originated at the cloud which flows to the devices
  (usually representing device commands or device desired properties).

Also, do not hesitate to review our [Glossary of IoT
Terms](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/iot/iot-glossary).